Smooth qr vignette (#314)
cmu-delphi/epipredict: vignettes/smooth-qr.Rmd

---
title: "Smooth Quantile Regression"
---

> 

Reviewer: Same comment as #313

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = FALSE,
  comment = "#>",
  warning = FALSE,
  message = FALSE,

>   cache = TRUE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  out.width = "100%"
```

)
```

# Introducing smooth quantile regression

> Whereas the standard application of time-series forecasting techniques has been to forecast single horizons, in multi-period forecasting, the goal is to forecast several horizons simultaneously. The standard application of these techniques aims to predict the signal for a single forecast horizon (or "ahead"), most often one-step-ahead. This is useful in epidemiological applications where decisions are often based on the trend of a signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whereas other time-series forecasting examples in this package have used (direct) models for single horizons, in multi-period forecasting, the goal is to (directly) forecast several horizons simultaneously. This is useful in epidemiological applications where decisions are often based on the trend of a signal.
```

Reviewer: Also, we should cite the paper early on: https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.09723

Author: Added a citation near to the beginning of the vignette

> The idea underlying smooth quantile regression that the future can be approximated by a smooth curve. So this approach enforces smoothness across the horizons for point estimation by regression or interval prediction by quantile regression. Our focus in this chapter is the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea underlying smooth quantile regression that set forecast targets can be approximated by a smooth curve. So this approach enforces smoothness across the horizons for point estimation by regression or interval prediction by quantile regression. Our focus in this chapter is the latter.
```

# Built-in function for smooth quantile regression and its parameters

The built-in smooth quantile regression function, `smooth_quantile_reg()` provides a model specification for smooth quantile regression that works under the tidymodels framework. It has the following parameters and default values:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
smooth_quantile_reg(
  mode = "regression",
  engine = "smoothqr",
  outcome_locations = NULL,
  quantile_levels = 0.5,
  degree = 3L
)
```

For smooth quantile regression, the type of model or `mode` is regression.

> The only `engine` that is currently supported is `smooth_qr()` from the [`smooth_qr` package](https://dajmcdon.github.io/smoothqr/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only `engine` that is currently supported is `smooth_qr()` from the [`smoothqr` package](https://dajmcdon.github.io/smoothqr/).
```

The `outcome_locations` indicate the multiple horizon (ie. ahead) values. These should be specified by the user.

The `quantile_levels` parameter is a vector of values that indicates the quantiles to be estimated. The default is the median (0.5 quantile).

> The `degree` parameter indicates the number of polynomials used for smoothing of the response. It should be no more than the number of responses. If the degree is precisely equal to the number of aheads, then there is no smoothing. To better understand this parameter and how it works, we should look to its origins and how it is used in the model.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `degree` parameter indicates the degree of the polynomials used for smoothing of the response. It should be no more than the number of aheads. If the degree is precisely equal to the number of aheads, then there is no smoothing. To better understand this parameter and how it works, we should look to its origins and how it is used in the model.  
```

# Model form 

> Smooth quantile regression is linear auto-regressive, with the key feature being a transformation that forces the coefficients to satisfy a constraint. The purpose if this is for each model coefficient to be a smooth function of ahead values, and so each such coefficient is set to be a linear combination of smooth basis functions (such as a spline or a polynomial).

Reviewer: This is not the easiest interpretation. It's actually the fitted values that you want to satisfy the constraint $X\hat B$ not $\hat B$. But because things are linear, this implies a constraint $\hat B$.

```{r}
edf <- case_death_rate_subset
```

We will set the forecast date to be November 30, 2021 so that we can produce forecasts for target dates of 1 to 28 days ahead. We construct our test data, `tedf` from the days beyond this.

```{r}
fd <- as.Date("2021-11-30")

tedf <- edf %>% filter(time_value >= fd)
```

We will use the most recent 3 months worth of data up to the forecast date for training.

```{r}
edf <- edf %>% filter(time_value < fd, time_value >= fd - 90L)
```

And for plotting our focus will be on a subset of two states - California and Utah.

```{r}
geos <- c("ut", "ca")
```

Suppose that our goal with this data is to predict COVID-19 death rates at several horizons for each state. On day $t$, we want to predict new deaths $y$ that are $a = 1,\dots, 28$ days ahead at locations $j$ using the death rates from today, 1 week ago, and 2 weeks ago. So for each location, we'll predict the median (0.5 quantile) for each of the target dates by using

> $$

Reviewer: Maybe use $b$ not $\beta$, to match the paper.

Author: For now, will leave as is.

  rec <- epi_recipe(x) %>%
    step_epi_lag(case_rate, lag = c(0, 7, 14)) %>%
    step_epi_lag(death_rate, lag = c(0, 7, 14)) %>%
    step_epi_ahead(death_rate, ahead = aheads)

  f <- frosting() %>%
    layer_predict() %>%
    layer_unnest(.pred) %>%
    layer_naomit(distn) %>%
    layer_add_forecast_date() %>%
    layer_threshold(distn)

  ee <- smooth_quantile_reg(
    quantile_levels = quantiles,
    outcome_locations = aheads,
    degree = degree
  )

  ewf <- epi_workflow(rec, ee, f)

  the_fit <- ewf %>% fit(x)

  latest <- get_test_data(rec, x, fill_locf = TRUE)

  preds <- predict(the_fit, new_data = latest) %>%
    mutate(forecast_date = fd, target_date = fd + ahead) %>%
    select(geo_value, target_date, distn, ahead) %>%
    pivot_quantiles_wider(distn)

  preds
}
```

Notice that we allow the function user to specify the aheads, degree, and quantile as they may want to change these parameter values. We also allow for input of the forecast date as we fixed that at the onset of this demonstration.

We now can produce smooth quantile regression predictions for our problem:

```{r, warning = FALSE}
smooth_preds <- smooth_fc(edf, fd = fd)

> head(smooth_preds)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
smooth_preds
```

```
Most often, we're not going to want to limit ourselves to just predicting the median value as there is uncertainty about the predictions, so let's try to predict several different quantiles in addition to the median:

```{r, warning = FALSE}
smooth_preds <- smooth_fc(edf, quantiles = c(.1, .25, .5, .75, .9), fd = fd)

> head(smooth_preds)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
smooth_preds
```

    ) +
    geom_ribbon(aes(target_date, ymin = `0.25`, ymax = `0.75`),
      fill = "#00488E", alpha = .8
    ) +
    geom_line(data = train_test_dat, aes(time_value, death_rate), size = 1.5) +
    geom_line(aes(target_date, `0.5`), color = "orange", size = 1.5) +
    geom_vline(xintercept = fd) +
    facet_wrap(~geo_value) +
    theme_bw(16) +
    scale_x_date(name = "", date_labels = "%b %Y") +
    theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, hjust = 1)) +
    ylab("Deaths per 100K inhabitants")
}
```

Since we would like to plot the actual death rates for these states over time, we bind the training and testing data together and input this into our plotting function as follows:

```{r, warning = FALSE}
plot_preds(smooth_preds, geos, bind_rows(tedf, edf), fd)
```

We can see that the predictions are smooth curves for each state, as expected when using smooth quantile regression. In addition while the curvature of the forecasts matches that of the truth, the forecasts do not look remarkably accurate.

## Varying the degrees parameter

We can test the impact of different degrees by using the `map()` function. Let's try out all degrees from 1 to 7:

> ```{r, warning = FALSE}

Author: Noted

smooth_preds_list <- map(1:7, ~ smooth_fc(edf,
  degree = .x,
  quantiles = c(.1, .25, .5, .75, .9),
  fd = fd
) %>%
  mutate(degree = .x)) %>% list_rbind()
```

One way to quantify the impact of these on the forecasting is to look at the mean absolute error (MAE) or mean squared error (MSE) over the degrees. We can select the degree that results in the lowest MAE. 

Since the MAE compares the predicted values to the actual values, we will first join the test data to the predicted data for our comparisons:
```{r, message = FALSE}
tedf_sub <- tedf %>%
  rename(target_date = time_value, actual = death_rate) %>%
  select(geo_value, target_date, actual)

smooth_preds_df_deg <- smooth_preds_list %>%

>   left_join(tedf_sub)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  left_join(tedf_sub, by = c("geo_value", "target_date"))
```

```

And then compute the MAE for each of the degrees:
```{r, message = FALSE}
smooth_preds_df_deg <- smooth_preds_list %>%

>   left_join(tedf_sub) %>%

Reviewer: This was already done in the previous chunk, right?

Author: Yes. Removed one of the redundancies.

  group_by(degree) %>%
  mutate(error = abs(`0.5` - actual)) %>%
  summarise(mean = mean(error))

# Arrange the MAE from smallest to largest

> head(smooth_preds_df_deg %>% arrange(mean))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
smooth_preds_df_deg %>% arrange(mean)
```

To get the basic quantile regression results we can utilize the forecaster that we've already built. We can simply set the degree to be the number of ahead values to re-run the code without smoothing. 
```{r, warning = FALSE}
baseline_preds <- smooth_fc(edf, degree = 28L, quantiles = several_quantiles, fd = fd)
```

And we can produce the corresponding plot to inspect the predictions obtained under the baseline model:

```{r, warning = FALSE}
plot_preds(baseline_preds, geos, bind_rows(tedf, edf), fd)
```

Unlike for smooth quantile regression, the resulting forecasts are not smooth curves, but rather jagged and irregular in shape.

For a more formal comparison between the two approaches, we could compare the test performance in terms of accuracy through calculating either the, MAE or MSE, where the performance measure of choice can be calculated over over all times and locations for each ahead value

```{r, message = FALSE}
baseline_preds_mae_df <- baseline_preds %>%

>   left_join(tedf_sub) %>%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  left_join(tedf_sub, by = c("geo_value", "target_date"))
```

  group_by(ahead) %>%
  mutate(error = abs(`0.5` - actual)) %>%
  summarise(mean = mean(error)) %>%
  mutate(type = "baseline")

smooth_preds_mae_df <- smooth_preds %>%

>   left_join(tedf_sub) %>%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  left_join(tedf_sub, by = c("geo_value", "target_date"))
```

  group_by(ahead) %>%
  mutate(error = abs(`0.5` - actual)) %>%
  summarise(mean = mean(error)) %>%
  mutate(type = "smooth")

preds_mae_df <- bind_rows(baseline_preds_mae_df, smooth_preds_mae_df)

ggplot(preds_mae_df, aes(ahead, mean, color = type)) +
  geom_line() +
  xlab("Ahead") +

>   ylab("Mean MAE")

Reviewer: Let's not use these colours.

```

or over all aheads, times, and locations for a single numerical summary.

```{r}
mean(baseline_preds_mae_df$mean)
mean(smooth_preds_mae_df$mean)
```

The former shows that forecasts for the immediate future and for the distant future are more inaccurate for both models under consideration. The latter shows that the smooth quantile regression model and baseline models perform very similarly overall, with the smooth quantile regression model only slightly beating the baseline model in terms of overall average MAE.

> One other commonly used metric is the WIS score ([ Bracher et al., 2021](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.12881.pdf)), which a scoring rule that is based on the population quantiles. The point is to score the interval, whereas MAE only evaluates the accuracy of the point forecast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One other commonly used metric is the Weighted Interval Score (WIS, [Bracher et al., 2021](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.12881.pdf)), which a scoring rule that is based on the population quantiles. The point is to score the interval, whereas MAE only evaluates the accuracy of the point forecast.
```

> Suppose we have $F$ be a forecaster composed of predicted quantiles $q_{\tau}$ for the set of quantile levels $\tau$. Then, in terms of the predicted quantiles, the WIS for target variable $Y$ is represented as follows ([McDonald et al., 2021](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2111453118)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $F$ be a forecast composed of predicted quantiles $q_{\tau}$ for the set of quantile levels $\tau$. Then, in terms of the predicted quantiles, the WIS for target variable $Y$ is represented as follows ([McDonald et al., 2021](https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.2111453118)):
```

Now, we write a simple function for the first representation of the score that is compatible with the latest version of `epipredict` (adapted from the corresponding function in [smoothmpf-epipredict](https://github.com/dajmcdon/smoothmpf-epipredict)). The inputs for it are the actual and predicted values and the quantile levels.

```{r}
wis_dist_quantile <- function(actual, values, quantile_levels) {
  2 * mean(pmax(
    quantile_levels * (actual - values),
    (1 - quantile_levels) * (values - actual),
    na.rm = TRUE
  ))
}
```

Next, we apply the `wis_dist_quantile` function to get a WIS score for each state on each target date. We then compute the mean WIS for each ahead value over all of the states. The results for each of the smooth and baseline forecasters are shown in a similar style line plot as we chose for MAE:

```{r}
smooth_preds_wis_df <- smooth_preds %>%

>   left_join(tedf_sub) %>%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  left_join(tedf_sub, by = c("geo_value", "target_date"))
```

  rowwise() %>%
  mutate(wis = wis_dist_quantile(actual, c(`0.1`, `0.25`, `0.5`, `0.75`, `0.9`), several_quantiles)) %>%
  group_by(ahead) %>%
  summarise(mean = mean(wis)) %>%
  mutate(type = "smooth")

baseline_preds_wis_df <- baseline_preds %>%
  left_join(tedf_sub) %>%
  rowwise() %>%
  mutate(wis = wis_dist_quantile(actual, c(`0.1`, `0.25`, `0.5`, `0.75`, `0.9`), several_quantiles)) %>%
  group_by(ahead) %>%
  summarise(mean = mean(wis)) %>%
  mutate(type = "baseline")

preds_wis_df <- bind_rows(smooth_preds_wis_df, baseline_preds_wis_df)

ggplot(preds_wis_df, aes(ahead, mean, color = type)) +
  geom_line() +
  xlab("Ahead") +

>   ylab("Mean WIS")

Reviewer: Better colours.
